What is a homeowners association?

The Association is a legal corporation organized and incorporate under the laws of your state or commonwealth. The Association has Articles of Incorporation that entitle the association to exercise powers of a corporation. By purchasing a home within your community association, you automatically become a member of the association and will remain so for as long as you own your home. Membership in the association is mandatory and automatic for all owners. The deed to each lot and/or parcel specifically designates that the property owner will comply with the Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&R’s) of the association. You should have received a copy of these documents at the time your home purchase was closed by the title company. As a property owner in a community association, you will be required to pay assessments, abide by the community’s rules and restrictions and maintain those areas of your home for which you are responsible.

What empowerment does the membership have?

Pursuant to the Bylaws:

Election of the Board of Directors
Removal of a member of the Board of Directors
Call for a special meeting of the members pursuant to the bylaws
Pursuant to the CC&R’s:

Voting on increasing the maximum annual assessment, if over a set amount
Voting on amendment to Articles, Bylaws, and CC&R’s
What is the purpose of a Board of Directors and what is their Role?

Your Association is a non-profit corporation. As such, the Board’s responsibility is to run the business of the corporation. The board has a fiduciary responsibility to the stockholders or owners of the corporation. This duty includes timely collection of assessments as well as payments made for services provided to the Association. In general, Board Members are the decision makers for the Association. The Board of Directors is comprised of individual homeowners.All affairs of your association are governed by the Board of Directors.

What decisions are the Board of Directors empowered to make?

Pursuant to the Bylaws: (including, but not limited to):

Filling a vacancy on the Board of Directors
Establishing rules and regulations for the association
Setting the Annual Assessment rate
Contracting for services of the association (management, landscape, maintenance, etc)
Using and disbursing association funds
Establishing committees
Enforcing the CC&R’s
Electing officers for the association
Preparing the annual budget
Insuring the association
Investing excess funds controlled by the Association
Pursuant to the CC&R’s:

Establishing an Architectural Review Committee
Collecting assessments
Establishing the standard of care for the maintenance of the common areas
Interpreting the wording of all governing documents
How is the Board of Directors elected? What is the election process?

The members of the association vote to elect the Board of Directors. We have specific bylaws outlining the process for board elections. Board elections take place at the annual meeting of the members in person or by absentee ballot and per state statute. Director terms become vacant and are filled at the Annual Meeting. At the Annual Meeting the votes of the membership are tallied for those candidates who are running for a position on the Board. Those voting must also be in good standing in order for their vote to count. All the votes will be tallied and the results announced at the end of the meeting.

I don’t want to run for the Board but would like to participate on a Committee? What are the requirements?

The Board appoints other committee members as deemed appropriate to carry out its purpose and delegate to said committees such powers and duties required to execute and enforce the committee’s responsibilities. Each committee shall perform such functions as directed by the Covenants and shall advise the Board on all matters pertaining to their Committee.

I don’t want to run for the Board but would like to participate on a Committee? What are the requirements?

The Board appoints other committee members as deemed appropriate to carry out its purpose and delegate to said committees such powers and duties required to execute and enforce the committee’s responsibilities. Each committee shall perform such functions as directed by the Covenants and shall advise the Board on all matters pertaining to their Committee.

What are the differences between assessments, dues, and fees?

Assessments and dues are both references to your mandatory monthly, quarterly, or annual assessments (whichever pertain to your community). Fees, on the other hand, are typically additional charges incurred by a member of the association who is delinquent in paying assessments or has violated the governing documents of the association.\